Even before I had ever uttered the term "data scientist," a career
involving "science" and "data" struck me as a natural choice based on
yearnings that go back to my childhood.  Indeed, for all of my
sixteen-year post-graduate career, and long before the term reached
the popular lexicon, I have done data science.  Until recently,
however, my data skills have only found specialized applications in
narrow academic disciplines.  I now choose to broaden my techniques,
and the range of problems I can tackle, so I can work for employers
beyond academia, solving challenging problems, and deriving
penetrating insights from data.

My path to science began at an early age.  When I was about 10 years
old, my loving father introduced me to the television series "Cosmos,"
and I remember feeling completely mesmerized by the show.  Science, as
articulated by Carl Sagan, aroused in me a deep sense of awe for the
universe and our collective experience as human beings.  Even as a
young child, I grasped many of the concepts that Sagan so skillfully
conveyed.  Sagan awakened me to the fragility of our human society,
and the urgency demanded by our many pressing social problems.

Later, when I was 12, I received an ATARI 800 computer for Christmas,
and I quickly taught myself to code.  By the end of high school, I had
programmed my rudimentary computer to follow a recipe to draw fractals
that I found in a "Scientific American" column.  In college, I became
an Applied Mathematics major after a summer research experience doing
something similar to what I had done with the ATARI.  In the
subsequent summer, I made a mathematical discovery from drawing a
different fractal, in similar way.  With my mentors at the University
of Colorado, I published the result, and later learned that the field
considered it important.  The accomplishment earned me admission to
Cornell University for graduate school with a full fellowship from the
National Science Foundation.

Since 2003, when I earned my Ph.D., I have been employed in
data-intensive scientific fields.  Soon after graduation from Cornell,
I started working as a researcher at the University of Maryland,
studying human balance control.  I later moved back and forth between
Johns Hopkins University and Yale University, researching motor
control and neuroscience.  Ten years into my academic career, I
started teaching mathematics and statistics at American University,
while still publishing and doing research in my spare time.

Despite giving me an introduction to data, my early training prepared
me to study models, not data.  A model is a mathematical description
of what to expect from data.  Models codify assumptions about physical
systems.  Cornell University trained me to study and understand the
implications of such modeling assumptions---I turned this training
into a successful academic career.

Although my Ph.D. dissertation contained visualizations and analyses
of real-world data from a human locomotion lab, the analyses of these
data remained much simpler, from the perspective of data science, than
the analyses of the accompanying locomotion model.  Soon after I left
Cornell, I identified a desire to advance my career by getting my
hands dirty with more sophisticated analyses of such real world
data---while still staying true to my training in modeling.  So I
started studying statistical methods for fitting models to data.
These methods allow a principled construction of models using data
from the physical system, rather than using just guesses when first
principles do not apply.

To try to understand the statistical methods better, my first
model-fitting projects involved simulated data---in other words, data
from known and well understood models of physical systems---not data
from the physical systems, themselves.  One might say that I could not
escape from my training: I still studied models, keeping my hands
clean from real-world data.  Nevertheless, my results confirmed the
value of this approach.

Along with my colleagues at the University of Maryland, I wanted to
develop a diagnostic tool for understanding what part(s) of the
postural control system failed for each subject when they suffered
from repeated falls.  We expected that such a tool would help treat
fall-prone patients---common, for different reasons, among elderly
populations.  A patient with sensory deficits should be treated
differently than a patient with motor deficits, and both should be
treated differently from a patient with central deficits---of which
many exist.  We planned a simple perturbation approach, with
model-fitting analyses of data from each patient's postural sway, to
understand precisely what part of the system failed and why.

To our surprise, my approach saved the lab a lot of time and money by
showing that under very general conditions, a so-called pole-zero
cancellation would thwart our diagnostic ambitions, even in the
easiest to examine patient: a mathematical model patient.  With the
postural control model, I analyzed and understood the mathematical
conditions that doomed our proposed diagnostic tool, and showed that
we would need techniques more invasive than ethically possible to
rectify the situation.  I published this result in 2009, still with
hands clean of real-world data from fall-prone subjects.  Fortunately,
I had already moved to an animal lab, where such experiments became
possible, but keeping to my wheelhouse, all four of my papers that
came from that lab remained similarly theoretical, involving different
ways of understanding models of animal motor control.

Sometime later, in 2013, I began teaching mathematics and statistics
at American University.  While at AU, my department started a data
science degree program and I participated in its formation.  In the
process, I learned a lot about the field.  With my colleagues, I
considered and discussed what employers would want from our graduates.
I explored Kaggle, and started reading job postings. The experience
left me intrigued and drawn to this exciting profession.  I became
aware of the revolutionary consequences of the drop in the price of
archiving data and amazed by the enormous volume of data cheaply or
freely available to the public.  I purchased, and started reading, a
library of data science books.  I enrolled in Coursera courses, and I
downloaded data science and machine learning libraries from the
internet.  Most significantly, started taking on projects to develop
my skills.

To this end, I sought out a colleague, Misha Ahrens, who leads a
neuroscience lab doing big data research at the Howard Hughes Janelia
Research Campus.  With data he derived from calcium image video
experiments, I performed a surprising calculation of the intrinsic
dimension (only 15 to 20) of the neural activity in the whole brain
(over 90,000 individual neurons) of a larval zebrafish performing a
virtual sensorimotor stabilization task.

At AU, I taught an R-based Introduction to Statistical Computation and
Modeling class, and as a result, I took on new research interests.
Specifically, I became fascinated with topics that showed particular
popularity among my students in their class projects: baseball and
Twitter.  I published one baseball paper on my own, and I am currently
preparing another baseball manuscript (with my student collaborator
and AU undergraduate Jake Berberian).  Additionally, I have planned a
collaboration (with my colleague and AU Professorial Lecturer Jacob
Ward) analyzing tweets from Twitter.

Since setting an intention to develop broader data science skills, I
have brainstormed many ideas for projects.  These ideas have made me
realize just how much data science skills open up opportunities.  One
family of projects has particular appeal to the emotions aroused in me
by Carl Sagan almost 40 years ago, and strongly motivates me to
achieve mastery of my skills.  Specifically, I would like to discover
and communicate insights from the vast public archive that foster
hope, courage, love, compassion, forgiveness, and positive engagement
in human society.  I am not specifically looking for this opportunity
in a job, because the constraint of needing to find funding for such a
project might prove limiting to its goals.  Indeed, I am perfectly
happy to do data science projects outside of my formal employment,
even if I envision them for "someday" unspecified in the future.  That
said, these personal ambitions may guide choices in my career.  For
example, because I believe that many of the insights most helpful to
human civilization will come from textual data, I seek training and
work opportunities that will develop my skills in natural language
processing, data wrangling, and machine learning relevant to deriving
insights from text.

In January 2019, when I first heard about a fully-funded fellowship
for a data science boot camp at The Flatiron School in Washington, DC,
I realized that the time had come to try to make my move to a more
traditional data science career.  After the fellowship, I want a data
science job that will allow me to fully engage creatively in
challenging problems, provide a fulfilling and supportive environment
for success, and give me the opportunity to learn and progress in my
career.  I am in the process of figuring out what types of workplaces
will best meet these objectives, but one prospect that currently seems
attractive to me is a company that does data science for a wide range
of clients.

I cannot know what treasures I will write, a year from now, concerning
my expanding career in data science, nor what projects, on the job, or
on my own, I will pursue, but I stand prepared and excited for the
journey that continues.

